Philippe Lumpkin
430
Fall, 2020
430: Algorithm Dessign and Analysis

Implementation:
Just to touch on the last statement i said in my implementation, i have been doing a lot of practice with python.
I love all of the tricks that it has to offer. These two programs were implemented with python 3 within
the schools linux servers.

Testing Expectations:
Doing my research on bubble sort beforehand, I assumed that bubble sort would be slow compared all the other programs
more specifically selection sort. In that research I saw that bubble sort, unoptimized, will run O(n^2) always, which 
asympotically is slow. Based on the previous results selction sort could be on par with insertion, but i still think that
merge will be the overall fastest.

Testing Observations:
I thought the data here was really interesting, but did match my expectations. I think it is interesting to note that both
bubble sort and secection sort both run asymptotically O(n^2). So you would think that there times would be very similar. But
based on my excel spreadsheet, in particular, the three worst, average, and best graphs, all show that bubble sort takes the longest.
And that is between everyone of the data entries between insertion, selection, and merge. Also based on my last expectation, based off 
time selection and insertion are very compareable in worst and average case, but not in best case where insertion does significantally better.

Analysis:
As i mentioned above, selection sort ran faster than bubble sort even though they both run asymptotically the same. This is due to the 
fact that selection sort does not do as many swaps as bubble sort has to do. Which means that overall time of the program would be faster
than that of bubble sort. I also noticed that reverse for both were the worst, random for both were the average, and ordered for both, were
fastest. This seems to again be due to the fact that they are both asymptotically the same. 

Take-Away:
Bubble sort so far seems to be the least optimal sorting algorithm to use, at least when compared to insertion, merge, and selection. In 
its worse case running time at 10000 entries, bubble sort runs 8.3885 seconds, while insertion and selection run 5.5 seconds, and merge only 
0.0308. With that being said this goes to show that Merge sort is still the best sort out of the 4. 

